---
description: Font Awesome Pro integration for Material for MkDocs
---

# Iconoclast

Iconoclast integrates [Font Awesome](https://fontawesome.com/) [Pro](https://fontawesome.com/plans) with [Material for MkDocs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material). It makes
using Font Awesome Pro icons in your site as easy as using Font Awesome Free icons already is.[^1]
And with support for Font Awesome Kits[^2], using your own custom icons is just as simple.

[^1]: https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/icons-emojis/
[^2]: https://fontawesome.com/docs/web/setup/use-kit

??? question "Material for MkDocs already has a mechanism for [adding custom icons](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/setup/changing-the-logo-and-icons/?h=bootstrap#additional-icons). Why do I need Iconoclast?"

    You *could* download Font Awesome Pro, unzip it, and copy the SVG files into your project, but then you wouldn't
    be able to publish your project to GitHub without violating the [Font Awesome Pro license](https://fontawesome.com/support#what-cant-i-do-with-a-font-awesome-pro-license).
    Iconoclast allows you to use Font Awesome Pro icons in your project without exposing them in your codebase.

## Prerequisites

<div class="annotate" markdown>

- [:fontawesome-brands-font-awesome: Font Awesome Pro](https://fontawesome.com/plans) (1)
- [:logo: Material for MkDocs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material) (2)

</div>

1. Only Font Awesome 6 is supported by Iconoclast.
2. Not included as a dependency of Iconoclast and must be installed separately.

## Installation and Setup

First, install Iconoclast:

=== ":fontawesome-brands-python: pip"

    ```bash
    pip install iconoclast
    ```

=== ":simple-poetry: Poetry"

    ```bash
    poetry add iconoclast
    ```

=== ":pdm: PDM"

    ```bash
    pdm add iconoclast
    ```

Then, grab your Font Awesome package manager token from your [Font Awesome account page](https://fontawesome.com/account)
and add it to Iconoclast's plugin configuration.

You can do this via the following configuration option:

`token`

: :octicons-milestone-24: Default: `#!yaml !ENV [FONTAWESOME_PKG_TOKEN, FONTAWESOME_NPM_AUTH_TOKEN]` — Your Font Awesome
package manager token.

    <div class="annotate" markdown>

    === "Via environment variables"

        If your token is bound to the `FONTAWESOME_PKG_TOKEN` or `FONTAWESOME_NPM_AUTH_TOKEN` environment variables,
        Iconoclast will detect it automatically and you can omit this option from the plugin configuration.

        Otherwise, you can specify an environment variable with the `#!yaml !ENV` tag:

        === ":octicons-file-code-16: `mkdocs.yml`"

            ```yaml
            plugins:
                - iconoclast:
                    token: !ENV SOME_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE
            ```

    === "Via explicit hardcoding"

        You can explicitly hardcode your token in `mkdocs.yml` if you want, though this is obviously not recommended.

        === ":octicons-file-code-16: `mkdocs.yml`"

            ```yaml
            plugins:
                - iconoclast:
                    token: OATO-GA-MATA-YORUSHIKUTE (1)
            ```

    </div>

    1. Replace with your actual package manager token.

Finally, install Font Awesome Pro with the Iconoclast CLI:

```bash
iconoclast setup # (1)!
```

1.  !!! tip

        The Iconoclast CLI can also be invoked as `icl`.

## Configuration

!!! warning "Iconoclast requires emoji"

    Before using Iconoclast, make sure your Material for MkDocs site has been [configured to use emoji](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/icons-emojis/#configuration):

    === ":octicons-file-code-16: `mkdocs.yml`"

        ```yaml
        markdown_extensions:
            - attr_list
            - pymdownx.emoji:
                emoji_index: !!python/name:materialx.emoji.twemoji
                emoji_generator: !!python/name:materialx.emoji.to_svg
        ```

The simplest possible configuration is just adding Iconoclast's plugin to `mkdocs.yml`:

=== ":octicons-file-code-16: `mkdocs.yml`"

    ```yaml
    plugins:
        - iconoclast
    ```

You can now use Font Awesome Pro icons in Markdown files just as you would Font Awesome Free icons. For example,
`:fontawesome-duotone-icons:` will now render as :fontawesome-duotone-icons:.

### Social Cards

!!! warning "Deprecation warning"

    If you're using [Material for MkDocs Insiders](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/insiders/) 4.33.0 or
    later, the built-in social plugin has undergone a rewrite that renders Iconocards obsolete. You can safely ignore
    the content of this section and use the built-in social plugin as usual.

    As of Iconoclast 2.0.2, Iconocards will emit a deprecation warning on versions of Material for MkDocs where it is
    no longer needed.

Iconoclast's Iconocards plugin is **required** to use Iconoclast icons in social cards generated by Material for
MkDocs' built-in social plugin.[^3]

[^3]: https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/setup/setting-up-social-cards/

To use Iconocards, you must **remove** the built-in social plugin from `mkdocs.yml`. Don't worry — Iconocards is
fully backwards-compatible with the built-in social plugin; you won't lose any functionality.

=== ":octicons-file-code-16: `mkdocs.yml`"

    ```yaml
    plugins:
        - iconoclast
        - iconocards # (1)!
    ```

    1. Iconocards **must** be declared *after* Iconoclast.

Iconocards supports all [configuration options](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/setup/setting-up-social-cards/?h=social#built-in-social-plugin) of the built-in social plugin.

### CSS Support

If you want to use Font Awesome icons when [overriding blocks or partials](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/customization/#overriding-partials),
Iconoclast can automatically add the necessary CSS to your site so that you can reference Font Awesome
as you would in any other website (e.g, `#!html <i class="fa-solid fa-rocket"></i>` would render as
:fontawesome-solid-rocket:).

You can do this via the following configuration option:

`css`

: :octicons-milestone-24: Default: `false` — Whether to add Font Awesome's CSS to your site.

    === ":octicons-file-code-16: `mkdocs.yml`"

        ```yaml
        plugins:
          - iconoclast:
              css: true
        ```

### Using Kits

Have a Font Awesome Kit[^2] with custom icons that you'd like
to use in your project? Iconoclast has you covered.

To use a Kit, you'll have to set up the following configuration options:

<div class="annotate" markdown>

`kit.name`

: :octicons-milestone-24: The name of the Kit to use.

    === ":octicons-file-code-16: `mkdocs.yml`"

        ```yaml
        plugins:
          - iconoclast:
              kit:
                name: My Kit
        ```

`kit.token`

: :octicons-milestone-24: Default: `#!yaml !ENV FONTAWESOME_API_TOKEN` — Your Font Awesome API token. (1)

    === "Via environment variables"

        If your token is bound to the `FONTAWESOME_API_TOKEN` environment variable, Iconoclast will detect it
        automatically and you can omit this option from `mkdocs.yml`.

        Otherwise, you can specify a different environment variable it with the `#!yaml !ENV` tag:

        === ":octicons-file-code-16: `mkdocs.yml`"

            ```yaml
            plugins:
                - iconoclast:
                    kit:
                      name: My kit
                      token: !ENV SOME_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE
            ```

    === "Via explicit hardcoding"

        You can explicitly hardcode your token in `mkdocs.yml` if you want, though this is obviously not recommended.

        === ":octicons-file-code-16: `mkdocs.yml`"

            ```yaml
            plugins:
                - iconoclast:
                    kit:
                      name: My Kit
                      token: OSAKI-MO-MAE-MO-YOROSHIKU-NE (2)
            ```

</div>

1. This is distinct from your Font Awesome package manager token. You can find your API token on your
   [Font Awesome account page](https://fontawesome.com/account) (you may need to generate one first).

2. Replace with your actual API token.

Once you've configured your Kit, you need to install it:

```bash
iconoclast install
```

You can then reference your custom icons in Markdown files with the syntax `:fontawesome-kit-[icon-name]:`
(e.g. `:fontawesome-kit-solid-rakugo-sensu:`).

If you've enabled [CSS Support](#css-support), you can also reference your custom icons in HTML files with the syntax
`#!html <i class="fa-kit fa-[icon-name]"></i>` (e.g. `#!html <i class="fa-kit fa-solid-rakugo-sensu"></i>`).

!!! tip

    You need to rerun `iconoclast install` every time you make a change to your Kit's name or custom icons.

!!! warning "Using CSS with Kits counts against your pageviews"

    Font Awesome allots you a certain number of Kit pageviews per month.[^4] If you use Iconoclast's CSS support with a
    Kit, Iconoclast will serve your CSS via Font Awesome's CDN rather than bundling it with your site, which means that
    every time someone visits your site, it will count against your pageviews.

[^4]: https://fontawesome.com/docs/web/setup/use-kit#kits-and-pageviews
